# DSI-Africa-biomedical-data-science-competencies
 Developing a competency framework for biomedical data science 


Authors: Tshinakaho Malesa, Rolanda Julius, Verena Ras, Michelle Skelton, Nicola Mulder

Affiliation(s): University of Cape Town, DS-I Africa Coordinating Centre, eLwazi Open Data Science Platform

Background: Biomedical science has become data-intensive over the years and faces the challenge of a diverse range of data generated from research and clinical practice. Although data science is a rapidly growing and interdisciplinary field with dynamic standards, many competency frameworks and guidelines were developed with the commerce and business industries in mind. As such, limited frameworks exist for competencies for biomedical data science and related fields. 

Approach: Published frameworks, most notably, the ISCB Bioinformatics Competency Framework, Edison Framework and IBM Data Science Competency Framework that address the fields of data science, bioinformatics, biostatistics and clinical medicine were analysed for competencies relevant to biomedical data science. Further development of competencies included assignment of more granular details associated to each competency namely Knowledge, Skills, and Attitudes (KSAs).  Relevant published literature were consulted to identify the associated model persona profiles and supplement competency details. This was followed by critical review to mitigate potential overlap in competencies and elucidate distinct persona profiles. Competencies were then mapped to personas profiles. 

Findings: An initial set of 25 identified competencies were then reduced to 19 competencies following an iterative process and consultations with relevant stakeholders, balanced to cover machine learning and biomedical science domains. These competencies were grouped into core groups such as domain knowledge, data analytics, data management, professional development and team science to represent key elements that form part of the biomedical data science life cycle and practice. Three persona categories were identified as data science user, data scientist and data engineer. Furthermore, a scale of competency development progression was introduced by assigning three levels to persona categories namely, novice, intermediate and advanced. In addition, an adapted Blooms Taxonomy is used as indicators to measure competency. This resulted in nine defined persona profiles i.e., novice data science user, intermediate data science user & advanced data science user; and the same three levels of data scientist and data engineer.

Considerations & Future Implications: The multidisciplinary nature of biomedical science makes it difficult to identify competencies in domain knowledge that encompass all roles & responsibilities observed in the discipline. Another challenge is finding a balance in competencies to sufficiently address domain knowledge and machine learning approaches.  It was found that clear definitions for persona categories supplemented with example job profiles are important to clearly define boundaries for persona profiles and identify career progression without ambiguity. Dissemination of the competency framework will involve publishing in a peer-reviewed journal. The framework will serve the training community to inform the design of new curricula or revising existing training courses and programmes. It will also potentially inform the assessment of career development of professionals and trainees in biomedical data science.
